Polya Path Permutations Problem (P^4)
→ we renamed it!

The starting place for this project is a preprint of Richard E. Schwartz
building on a children's book he wrote. Here it is:

https://www.math.brown.edu/reschwar/Papers/salesman.pdf

The children's book is discussed here:

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PAfipT-NWlg

R. E. Schwartz calls the problem "Topological Salesperson", which is stretchy
nomenclature, but not ours. Please allow me to explain:

We will work in the context of an [1, l*2^d] x [1, l*2^d] integer grid graph
where allowable paths use the usual ENWS nearest neighbor steps. A /Polya path/
is a closed 2-valent ENWS sequence that returns to its initial condition while
staying within the (l,d)-expansive bounding square. By 2-valent we mean that
every path vertex has two incident path edges; we also require the path to be
non-self-intersecting, so a Polya path might also be called a Jordan path, or a
"topological circumference".

In jest, notice that TTSP and TCP^2 just aren't as concise as P^4. Well, I guess
that gives us a criterion to decide with...

For example, ENWS is the smallest Polya path of length 4. It fits in the square
with l=1, d=1. The next smallest Polya path has length 6: EENWWS and needs l=1,
d=2 while leaving space. Paths like these have been studied since at least the
days of POLYA. Closed paths allowing self-intersection were some of the first
examples where ordinary differential equations connected to enumerative
combinatorics.

I can't remember now if Polya or anyone else had filtered all closed paths to
non-crossing closed paths, so I'll offer a beginner question here:

Question. What is the count a(n) of length-n 2-valent Polya Paths? Is the
generating function differentiably finite?

Now, Schwartz's problem in real-valued, continuous geometry starts from an
ordered point set in a unit square and asks for bounds on the length of the
shortest circumference joining them. Actually it asks for a line, but that adds
at worst a factor of two when closing a disk of almost no area.

More specifically, the ask is for an infimum bound sensitive only to the number
of points and not their arrangement. An infimum is the greatest lower bound of a
set. In this case we have a set of minimum circumferences that varies over point
arrangements. Some arrangements are more difficult to connect than others. There
is at least one arrangement that is most difficult to connect. The circumference
obtained for this most difficult case is the infimum.

Difficulty, of course, is a concept from physics that has to do with work,
energy, efficiency, etc. Here we're taking the simplistic view that essentially
length is difficulty. We're looking for an infimum circumference passing through
a set of n points which are also labeled into a cyclic order.

By an okay tree construction, Schwartz obtains that:

O(N) < C(N) < O(N^(3/2)), with C for Circumference.

This is a tight bound when you consider how easy it is to obtain the strictly
worse result O(N^2) on a nice set of almost-grid points.

In fact, a static model like the dyadic flatenoid might only give a bound
O(infinity) when applied to a well-designed pathological limit. Seriously,
it's easy to find bad constructions that don't work in general.

The biggest difficulty of this problem is just that: There's always going to be
another pathological point set to worry about, and there's literally no way to
brute force every possible circumstance for N points because the geometry is
real geometry.

Or is there a way to brute force it all? Obviously not, well, not unless we go
to discrete math.

Topology and computer science and maybe even physics all give us tools we can
use to convert the ambiguity of a continuous unit square into something
discrete, definite and combinatorial. This something can then be subject to
rigorous enumeration as we have already seen in the case of ENWS Polya paths.

Here's the basic idea: We need to find out how much open space is around a point
and allow movement of the point in that open space.

That's where topology enters, because we might even transform the underlying
manifold. We're going to skip that part for now with the assumption that
local frame transform machinery is already there in math and-or physics.

Instead, let's go to the computer science department to ask the question: What
is a Quadtree?

Answer: It's a very useful tool for locating points in a unit square, and we can
combine it with topology to obtain a rigorous but simple domain set.

With the quadtree you recursively divide single unit squares into sets of 4 unit
squares eventually obtaining a grid of size [1, 2^d] x [1, 2^d]. Let's say that
you have an image whose pixel length and width are multiples of 2^d for some d.
You can group pixels together into rectangular image parts and then reconstruct
the image recursively using the quadtree, which is more precisely described as
the hierarchical adjacency graph associated to ordered subset inclusions.

To computer scientists, this is already well known. There's a sizeable
quadtree literature out there including one memorable item about a cat
who gets stuck in a quadtree.

We need to clarify in our math context what the quadtree structure is, and how
it can be used to work toward a solution of the P^4.

Finitely many points are distributed in a unit square with a recursive 4-ary
ruling, viz. nested, hierarchical 2x2 subsets. We introduce a 4-ary tree that
locates each point in its own square while also leaving some squares empty.

An empty square does not need to be subdivided. If a square contains two or more
points, it needs to be divided into 2x2 squares, possibly recursively. Typically
we do this rigidly with each of the four squares in the 2x2 arrangement having
the same area. After finitely many divisions, we obtain an imperfect quadtree
pointing to n points on n true leaves.

Next we forget branches not ending at a true leaf point in order to obtain a
topologically flexible structure. If the divide-and-prune process has produced
singleton branches, next we "renormalize" the tree graph by omitting the
valence-1 vertex and connecting the parent directly to its unique second
descendant. Repeating to a fixed point avoids the possibility of unnecessarily
deep trees and fixes a maximum depth per choice of integer n.

Let's briefly stop and mention that there is some topology hidden here because
implicitly when a renormalization happens, there must be a lot of space around
some points that have been jammed too closely together. Elimination of singleton
nodes can then be viewed as a mapping that rescales those points into the
surrounding empty space. Topology and/or manifold theory provide the tools for
doing those transforms in a rigorously invertible way. We'll get back to that
later!

Now let i, j, k count nodes with x = 2, 3 or 4 valence, respectively, and
distinguish branch-like symbols bₓ from true leaves l₀. Each branch introduces
a differential toward leaf count

X: bₓ : X ↦ X′ = X + x - 1.

Summing over all branch nodes, starting from one root (X=1) and ending in n true
leaves, we obtain 1 + i + 2j + 3k - n = 0. The total number of nodes, including
the root and true leaves, is m = i + j + k + n. The raw multinomial ordering of
these symbols is

binom(m; n,i,j,k) = m! / n! i! j! k!

Take any linear ordering of the bₓ and l₀ symbols. Cyclically shift it until the
partial sums from X = 1 reach zero only after the final term. This is the unique
shift that reads as a valid rooted tree, so we divide by m. A b₂ branching has
six distinct positional realizations, while a b₃ branching has only four. We
therefore multiply by 6^i 4^j to obtain the closed-form summand:

t(n) = 6^i 4^j * (n + i + j + k - 1)!/ n! i! j! k!

Where the a(n) = sum t(n) is taken over all nonnegative indices i, j, k ≥ 0
subject to the zero-sum constraint: 1 + i + 2j + 3k - n = 0.

What exactly does this integer sequence count? We've already pretty much spelled
out things like these typogeometries:

a(1) = 1

▪
×1

a(2) = 6

⟨□□▪▪⟩
×4

⟨□▪□▪⟩
×2

a(3) = 76

⟨□▪▪▪⟩
×4

⟨□□▪⟨□□▪▪⟩⟩
×8

⟨□□▪⟨□▪□▪⟩⟩
×8

⟨□□▪⟨□▪▪□⟩⟩
×8

⟨□□▪⟨▪□□▪⟩⟩
×8

⟨□□▪⟨▪□▪□⟩⟩
×8

⟨□□▪⟨▪▪□□⟩⟩
×8

⟨□▪□⟨□□▪▪⟩⟩
×8

⟨□▪□⟨□▪□▪⟩⟩
×4

⟨□▪□⟨□▪▪□⟩⟩
×8

⟨□▪□⟨▪□▪□⟩⟩
×4

To give another hint, if you don't have a better method already, try composing
over the unique valid order of the b_x l_0 sequences, then add □'s back in as
necessary. Do this until you get complete sets with all valid elements and
correct total counts.

What we haven't explained is how we're going to use these as labels for
instances of the P^4. First, we map the 4-ary linear structure CCW to 2x2
squares to obtain the correct quadtree geometry where a tree of depth d requires
a grid of at least [1, 2^d] x [1, 2^d] to contain all points. For points on
coarse levels we associate all squares falling in their entire larger quadtree
square as vertices where the one free point could possibly fall.

As necessary, we even allow freedom for every point by introducing l x l squares
at every quadtree leaf, true and false. This will sometimes help us in the
sequel when we give the constraints for computing Polya path lengths.

First let's just work easy cases by hand. At a(2), we have only ⟨□□▪▪⟩ and
⟨□▪□▪⟩ to worry about. Both of them are solved by the length-four ENWS path.
A metric length C(2) = 2 is then obtained by dividing taxicab length 4 by
the step size l*2^d.

Similarly at a(3) we do not have to yet worry about the order of points because
transpositions act as reflections.

We can inflate the item ⟨⟨□▪□▪⟩□▪□⟩ into two dimensions:

▪▪□□
▪▪□□
□□□▪
□□▪□

And draw the typogeometric solution NNWWSSEE as:

▪▪□□
▪...
□.□.
□...

Notice that it only has to visit one square in the coarse point to the NW,
and that more space is left for traversal if necessary.

I'm pretty sure just by looking at pictures that taxicab length 8 is the
longest path possible, but someone might want to check that.

A nuance is that longest taxicab path might not be longest circumference
due to recursive divisions. To compare lengths with our previous result
we need to divide by the scale factor 2^d, and then find: C(3)=8/2^2=2
that the three-point infimum circumference is the same as the two-point
infimum circumference. Again, a computer-double check would be nice.

Things begin to get weirder at four points when *permutations* begin to
matter. The simplest element ⟨▪▪▪▪⟩ can become ⟨1234⟩ or ⟨1324⟩. The second
item cannot be solved with l = 1, so we have to go to l=2 in order to find
the following solution:

fg56
e147
d238
cba9

This smallest dyadic flatenoid, the simple horseshoe baker's fold, has apparent
length 16, but each length is only 1/(l*2^d) = 1/(2*2^1) = 1/4, so the metric
length of the curve is now C = 4 rather than C = 2.

It's interesting to note that if we allowed the continuous limit where l goes
to infinity, and we push vertices to box corners, we can approach the absolute
continuous infimum of 4 + sqrt(2) by pixelating a pythagorean diagonal. The fact
that C = 4 is lesser completely depends on motion to corners. Choosing quadrant
centers we decrease the circumference by a factor 2 and C = 4 > 2 + Sqrt(2)/2.
Again, we'll have to return to calculations like these later.

Question. Is C=4 the infimum value for all 1201 four-point typogeometries, or is
there a nested geometry where the smallest circumference has C>4?

The generalization of this question to higher n seems to be a well-posed
question, though certainly not easy. It's a bit like the Hamiltonian path
problem and might ultimately need NP-complete methods.

Before leaving off let's sketch out exactly what's needed.

(1) a function from typogeometries such as ⟨⟨□▪□▪⟩□▪□⟩ to two-dimensional grid
    geometries of size [1, l*2^d] x [1, l*2^d] , where d is fixed and l
    increases from 1 as necessary.

(2) an algorithmic understanding of the notions: coarse points, sequencing of
    coarse points, how a Polya Path passes through a sequence of coarse points,
    when a Polya path can't pass through a sequence of coarse points, when
    l should increase and when it shouldn't.

(3) enumeration per typogeometry of all valid Polya paths, only increasing l
    when a path can't be found, only increasing l +1 at a time, and ultimately
    finding the minimum circumference of the particular typogeometry and chosen
    ordering.

(4) for emphasis let's mention that empty squares are labeled 0, while the
    squares belonging to coarse points are labeled 1 through N according to the
    chosen point ordering. As a Polya Path passes through squares, it inherits
    their labels and produces a digit string. The required ordering is valid
    when 1,2,...,N occurs as a subsequence of that string, read cyclically. For
    example, 0,1,3,4,0,3,2,3,1,4 is valid for four points because 1,2,3,4 can be
    checked off in that order. The first passage through 4 is not checked off
    because 2 and 3 have not yet been checked off.

    Geometrically, the actual point associated with a coarse point may lie in
    any square belonging to that coarse point. If the Polya Path passes through
    the coarse point too early, it can avoid the actual point there and find it
    explicitly in a different square later. A Polya Path can revisit coarse
    points on other squares it has not previously seen, but no square can ever
    be visited twice.

(5) for emphasis let's also reiterate that l only increases when a valid Polya
    Path does not exist, and we stop increasing l when a valid Polya Path is
    found. Adding rows and columns introduces too much uncertainty, so we
    have chosen to multiply them, which also adds space to coarse points,
    making the problem easier to solve.

(6) comprehensive enumeration over all a(n) elements of the set of quadtree
    typogeometries with n points. Then compare minimum circumferences to find
    the maximum, also the infimum of the set. We want to know extrema of both
    taxicab distance and metric circumference, and make notes when extrema
    happen for different typogeometries. Or does the infimum taxicab distance
    always lead to infimum metric circumference?

Once it's well understood that searches are deterministic and well-defined, we
just turn the crank and see how far we can get by brute force. Probably not far.

Once we've exhausted our most rigorous methods, then we get to a seventh point
where heuristics matter:

(7) Randomly search large geometries for new infimum records.

Point (7) is where we're most likely to get a sense of the asymptotics of the
P^4 question: as the number of points n goes to infinity, how does the infimum
circumference C(n) behave? Is it linear, or even quadratic? We need to do some
more experiments before a clear hypothesis can even be formed.


